Protein mutations can alter the binding affinity of protein-nucleic acid interactions and disrupt essential interaction networks. As many critical cellular functions rely on protein-nucleic acid binding, accurately predicting changes in binding free energy is highly valuable. Current methods are often limited in scope, with room for improvement in efficiency, and do not align well with the development trend of high-throughput techniques. In this work, we propose a novel multimodal deep learning framework, MutPNI-3D, to effectively evaluate the effects of missense mutations in DNA-binding and RNA-binding proteins. To achieve this goal, we integrate features derived from structure, sequence, and mutation energy terms, and perform deep fusion via a deep learning architecture. Specifically, we first introduce a deep graph panoramic attention-weaving network to integrate structural information at both residue and atomic levels. Next, the protein language model ProtTrans is employed to generate multi-dimensional feature embeddings, and a self-attention encoder is used for deep fusion and high-level sequence feature extraction. Finally, the FoldX program is utilized to calculate energy differences of mutated structures. Experimental results on multiple datasets demonstrate that MutPNI-3D outperforms other state-of-the-art methods, validating its robustness and generalization ability. Compared with other approaches, MutPNI-3D is more capable of capturing the overall trend of data, enabling strong performance on large-scale datasets and suitability for future development.
